[Music]
welcome everybody the very first YouTube
channel and also audio podcast on anchor
is where it will also show up YouTube
channel interview in a series it's the
the series is called you may have
noticed Steven gray vision Steven gray
all one word ste pH en and then capital
gr a why vision and the purpose of these
is to explore the possibilities of an
awakening humanity I guess that's the
simplest way of putting it and you will
be able to subscribe to these I hope to
be able to put a subscribe button up
here somewhere at some point and some
contact information both at the
beginning and the end so as I say I'm
very excited because this is the very
first one of these in a series that I
hope to continue for quite a while
Chris beige is our first my first guest
and we both acknowledge just before
putting on the recording that we're both
feeling honored about this and so that's
really exciting in itself and so before
I actually ask Chris to say anything I'm
going to read a short bio and add a
couple of little comments of my own so
Christopher M beige officially is his
professor emeritus in the Department of
Philosophy and religion at Youngstown
State University where he taught for 33
years
he is also adjunct faculty at the
California Institute of integral studies
and a fellow at the Institute of noetic
scientists sciences an award-winning
teacher Chris's work explores the
philosophical implications of
non-ordinary states of consciousness
especially psychedelic states Chris has
written three books life style life
cycles I won't describe them here
they're findable of course dark night
early dawn which I read about 20 years
ago wonderful book the living classroom
which I have not read and his more
recent or well quite recent about a year
ago maybe or was it less
remember six months yeah anyway LSD and
the mind of the universe
subtitled diamonds from heaven and also
I'm going to be asking Chris about to
give a summary of the 20-year journey
that he went on that's described in LSD
and the mind of the universe but I don't
want it to take the whole interview and
in particular because well among other
reasons because it's he talks he does do
a thorough kind of linear job of going
through all that in two or three of
these YouTube videos and so I would
suggest if you really want to get into
the details short of reading the book
which is a stunner it's just amazing I
would suggest going on YouTube and
looking up diamonds from heaven time
waiver summer world 2018 and there's a
like a 50 minute talk that they recorded
of Chris going through the whole journey
and that book by the way I have it right
here so I'm going to show it to you
called LSD and the mind of the universe
diamonds from heaven Chris don't let me
forget at the end to ask you for any
kind of contact information or links
that you would like people to follow up
on yeah thank you so anyway welcome
Chris to my inaugural Steven gray vision
youtube channel series it's a pleasure
to be with you today Steven and honored
to be in your Memorial voyage all right
so you know there's lots of things I
want to ask you about and discuss with
you and the I think a good place to
start however it would be if you could
give a relatively short again because
people can go and look at the video and
you have videos on youtube if you could
give maybe I don't know
I've minute or something I don't know
exactly sort of summary of you know well
in the in the talks you talked a little
bit about you know what got you into it
you know maybe just
real brief reference to you know why you
did this in the first place
and then a little bit about the 20 year
journey and perhaps what you know where
where it went after that something like
that so basically what you're asking for
is a highlight reel or trailer for the
book yeah well I'm a philosopher of
religion I was trained in foster of
religion and I came to this work with an
interest in the potential of
psychedelics to explore the deeper
reaches of consciousness and by pushing
through our personal on personal
unconscious entering into the
consciousness what I eventually came to
understand it's the mind of the universe
itself
so I did 20 years 73 high-dose LSD
sessions and I'd emphasize the
significance of that particular protocol
high-dose sessions working at 500 to 600
micrograms because this opened up
territory and experiences that were much
deeper than when you're working with the
types of psychedelics and the levels of
doses of psychedelics which are being
used in the therapeutic community today
which is so important and very important
development there this was different
this is a much more aggressive
shattering of different levels of
consciousness and the boundaries of
consciousness I worked for four years
stopped for six years and then worked
for ten years I did an average of about
five sessions a year and where I want is
a long story but the highlight reel is I
spent about two years basically working
at what Stan Grof calls the perinatal
level of consciousness processing a lot
of material around very early
experiences birth experiences death
experiences fear of death experiences
existential crises kind of work went
through a deep ego death had just
exploded my identity and catapulted me
into early level spiritual experiences
spiritual reality then
spent another two years going through a
much more intense purification process
that I called them the dark night of the
soul where the work clearly pivoted it
took me a long time to recognize it but
it clearly pivoted away from my personal
transformation are my personal healing
and entered into the collective psyche
where the focus was the healing or
transformation of this species mind
itself where I was processing
experiences coming from thousands and
hundreds of thousands of persons and
thousands of years of time when that
culminated I was spun into archetypal
reality experience various permutations
of archetypal reality and best
territories and the collective
unconscious and basically was learning
how to speech is live as a single
integrated entity as a single being all
of us being fractal embodiments of that
being when that culminated I went
through yet another round of death and
rebirth into causal level reality were
basically instead of the world being
composed of parts even the very big
parts of archetypal reality here the
universe basically pulsed as a single
entity as a single life form dissolving
all boundaries all membranes even the
membrane between matter and spirit I
explored or was given many gifts in that
territory for about a year and a chapter
that I call the benediction of blessings
and then for the last five years of my
work I entered into a domain of that I
came to call the diamond luminosity
entering into a state of consciousness
that was pure light and the most
difficult thing to describe is the hyper
hyper clarity just clarity beyond
measure of this form of light I
discovered that there are many levels of
light and the diamond luminosity was the
the purest highest level I reached in my
what Buddhism calls dharmakaya are the
absolute reality the clear light of
absolute reality for those five years I
entered this reality only four times in
26 sessions with a lot of purification a
lot of a lot of healing work done in
those intermediate sessions and then I
was given one final vision of a human
trajectory where we are in history which
had been a consistent theme in the work
and then basically the universe kicked
me out
it gave me two sessions wrapped up our
work without be really understanding yet
at the time that it was wrapping it up
but it wrapped me up wrapped up our work
and then ushered me on my way and I
stopped my work so I stopped the work I
began it in 1979 and I finished it in
1999 and after I finished it spirit said
to me in my meditation 20 years in 20
years out meaning that it would take me
20 years in order to understand and
digest the 20 years of experiences that
I had had and then it just so happened
not by any intent but it just so
happened that LSD in the mind of the
universe was published 20 years after my
last session hmm wonderful yes and you
know for people watching and listening
to this I want to say that you know if
you didn't quite gather how stunning
this journey or series of journeys
really has been read the book because
it's mind-blowing it's truly paradigm
shattering material I like to
occasionally joke with no particular
offense to Terence Mckenna who did a lot
of lovely work that the descriptions
that he gives of where he went
we're just kind of tapping into the
realms where you have explored where
you've gone into the you know in these
in these journeys so a practical
question though or
sort of yeah user friendly question so
to speak you have spoken in different
ways about well several things related
to this one is you said you wouldn't do
it the same way again because it was so
intense and then you also understood
that it wasn't about getting anywhere
particularly that's one aspect of this
question I'm about to pose the other one
is clearly this is not for everybody
and so there's something in there and
and then just on a practical level for
people who do feel like they are those
sort of deep exploring Psychonauts and
want to do something like this feel that
kind of a call like you have could you
just briefly describe the protocol the
safety protocol that you employed well
let's start with the safety protocol
yeah I basically used the protocol
established by Stanislav Grof in the
early years of his work and published in
his book LSD psychotherapy in 1980 he
distinguishes clearly low-dose
psycholytic sessions and high dose
psychedelic sessions in the early years
those psychedelic sessions were limited
to three I basically took that protocol
which always and then and then
multiplied the number of sessions to 73
but I was always working in isolation I
was working in the privacy of my home or
my wife's clinical office I was always
lying down protected from the outside
world no interruptions I had a sitter my
sitter for all this work was Carol my
first wife a clinical psychologist
listening to a very carefully curated
playlist of music to support the
deepening and the unfolding of the work
so basically the sessions were
completely internally focused sheltered
from the outside world there was no
interface with the outside world
accepted the music and the focus was on
encountering as deeply as possible what
was arising from within my own
consciousness now the reason I before we
go any further yeah a quick question
regarding the sitter for anyone who
going to do this kind of work on their
own what would you say the Job
Description prerequisites are for the
sitter like dude that does that person
need to have been to some of these inner
realms themselves to be able to do that
job or what would you say you know who
could do that job properly ideally a
person who's doing the sitting should be
experienced in these domains it depart
Lee depends upon how interactive the
work is but the more experienced the
sitter is the more comfortable he or she
is likely to be when the subject gets
into this territory in our case Carol
was not really interested in exploring
these domains herself she read the
literature with me and that's not
perhaps an ideal circumstance but it was
it worked sufficiently well for us the
responsibility of the sitter is to take
care of the the subject so that they
don't hurt themselves because some of
the spasms that come up in this session
they're pretty violent there's a lot of
throwing up when you're working with
high doses and that has to be taken care
of basically making sure the subject
stays focused so that there's no acting
out any attempt to sort of step away and
step outside of the session needs to be
discouraged and keep the person folk
material and then managing the music
staying in touch with the subject so
that they know they can anticipate where
the subject is sometimes asking
questions but usually not often so that
they can shift the music when the person
has gone into a shift in their own inner
experience can you say a little bit
about the music how important it is is
it to get the right kind of music I
think in your talk the one that I
mentioned on YouTube you said something
about it kind of a developing quality to
the music as it changed over the course
of the of the session of the yeah it was
six eight hours or so yeah well I
basically followed Helen Bonnie's
recommendations that Stan had
cited in his early work and she
differentiates five stages of an LSD
session and there's basically an
ascending there's an early latency and
then when the drug begins to kick in
there's a high activation and again this
is working with high levels of LSD where
the activation level is particularly
intense and there's a huge surge and the
quantity of energy that one is
processing and that continues to build
and you want music that can encourage
the surrendering encouraging the giving
in to whatever's happening and that it
supports the breakthrough of your own
defenses and then the experiences will
build until you reach a level where
eventually if you manage them well
courageously you go through some form of
crisis some crisis and the experience
some death and rebirth experience where
then you're catapulted for the remainder
of the session into the ecstatic portion
of the journey my experiences were
always the early portion of the session
was a purification experience
culminating and then ending in an
ecstatic portion of the experience then
there's a long peak of the experience
where once you've made that breakthrough
you want music that supports the long
expanding expansive worldview and then a
very very slow decline re-entry with
gentle music that gives you a spacious
background that allows you to process
your experiences and as you come back to
your ordinary consciousness integrate
your experiences with your conventional
your identity or ordinary identity I
found that after a number of sessions
that when I began to use indigenous
music chanting with my sessions I found
that to be much more powerful much more
evocative than classical music even
powerful classical music so I had a
preference for that and so I collected a
lot of indigenous music over the years
from different
cultures and you don't want music with
any words that you can understand so you
want music that doesn't keep you on
familiar ground which is another
advantage of indigenous music you know
vocal or non vocal types because it
throws you into foreign territory and
the foreign territory is what you really
want to be exploring right now not
staying on the familiar ground
absolutely yeah
so before we get into the sort of
farther reaches of some of the
experiences you had and implications of
that I just listened or watched parts of
that video that I'd mentioned earlier
and you referenced William James the
great early 20th century's psychologist
mm-hmm who said something like that
there are three stages of this kind of
work that you've been doing and one is
the first one is kind of you know
pushing the boundaries going out into
exploratory territory but then following
that up with meticulous recording and in
a third stage of analysis and sharing is
that more or less accurate yeah that's
my that's not so much William James but
it's my articulation of the principles
of psychedelic philosophy based on the
pioneering work that James did in that
he used nitrous oxide and drew very
striking conclusions in the context of
the varieties of religious experience
book and basically I just articulated
this method from that that you go into
temporary non-ordinary States you record
those states afterwards as clearly and
precisely as you can and that's
important because that's really
important I think to complete the circle
of learning because if you want to do
this in a systematic fashion integrating
and attending to and trying to
understand your experiences lays the
foundation a strong foundation for your
next set of experiences just like our
dreams are very revelatory but if you
keep a dream journal people find that
their dreams often become more powerful
more articulate it is as if your
mind knows that you're paying attention
the unconscious knows you're paying
attention to it and therefore it ups its
game
likewise on a session the more attention
you pay to integration and consolidating
your experiences it is as if the cosmic
mind knows you're paying attention and
therefore it engages you more
systematically at the end so retaining
the experiences is really important and
particularly if you're pushing the far
boundaries like I was doing and entering
into territory that was radically new to
me an uncertain and I didn't have many
cues even in in the psychedelic
literature for trying to understand much
of it writing at the very edges of my of
my ability and trying to consolidate
what I experienced was an important part
of the process and if I can loop back to
your earlier question why I wouldn't do
it the same way again I wouldn't do it
the same way because of some of the
things I learned on the journey first of
all I found that over the long haul
working at doses this high even doing it
very responsibly and conscientiously and
supplementing it with a lot of other
spiritual practice a lot of attention to
my body a lot of yoga a lot of
meditation it's a very very demanding
protocol it exerts its it's a very
taxing protocol if I were doing it over
again I would be gentler with myself I
would balance high dose sessions with
low dose sessions I would balance LSD
which tends to be a high level cosmic
level psychedelic with psilocybin
ayahuasca other psychedelics which are
more body grounded in order to
facilitate an ongoing integration of the
peak experiences doing it the way I did
just hammering the high levels is
pushing and pushing it did open great
cosmic vistas but I think it I think I
was hard to run myself that I really
needed to be and maybe then was wise it
took me a long time to internalize it in
some ways too
recuperate from that entire journey the
other reason I would do it a little
differently is because I learned along
the way that this is not a journey that
comes ever comes to a distinct end when
I began this work I thought there was an
endpoint I was trying to get to the
endpoint some people described the
endpoint as oneness with God are
entering into the primal void and I had
entered into oneness with the divine
many times and I had learned that there
are many levels to that experience and
even levels to immersion in the primal
void and deep about two-thirds of the
way through the journey I had an
experience where the universe showed me
that it's an absolute infinite universe
I would never be able to get to the end
of it it's an open-ended journey you
take in as much of the universe as you
can as as healthy and as wise for you
but the idea of getting to the end was
just it was a misconception and because
of that that's another reason why I
would just be a little gentler and a
little patient with the pace of a slower
pace of evolution the Buddhist teacher
Chuck iam trungpa has one of his books
is called journey without goal familiar
with the ten ox herding pictures yes
yeah the way I've encountered them was
like the last one is something like and
thus ends the journey that never need to
have been made in the first place or
something like that yes yeah yeah and
now it's a little different you know I
started this work kind of with a focus
on enlightenment and that really is what
the ten ox herding pictures are about
that journey of awakening to the ever
present condition so that in the end you
come back to where you were but you come
back with your filters clear and the the
present the always present ever-present
condition is luminously there that's
where I that's the agenda I started with
but it was overs come over it was
superseded by two other aspects first it
was superseded
by the challenges of our collective
enlightenment of our collective
evolution eventually my personal healing
or my personal enlightenment to assist
completely superseded by responding to
the call to support our collective
transformation the transformation taking
place in history and the second thing
that superseded then even that was the
opportunity to explore the deep
structure of the universe itself to what
I'd call a cosmological exploration you
do not need to explore the deep
structure of the universe in order to
become awakened to become to your
spiritual senses you do not need to go
back to the beginning of the universe
and the Big Bang to transcend all limits
of time to enter archetypal reality to
abide in the the true and natural
condition that Buddhism calls there are
essential nature these are different
projects so my work kind of combined the
enlightenment project but really it kind
of yielded to a different project what
you might call the the Philosopher's
project the invitation to explore as far
as I could the nature of cosmic reality
mm-hmm yeah wonderful thank you for
clarifying that so I don't know how to
ask this question exactly or even if it
is a good question but but something
like this you know that kind of deep
work is clearly not you know prescribed
for a great majority of people it's for
particular individuals who feel that
they they're not calling and you know
feel that they're up for it and you
you've indicated in your talks that you
felt that calling you know earlier at
the beginning of your career you know
that you'd always been interested in
that state and you felt like are those
kinds that you know um you know effing
the ineffable is Allen Watts but
unscrewing the inscrutable so I guess
where I'm trying to go with this
question is people
hmm a lot of people are not ever going
to use psychedelics but then there's
another whole subset of people in the in
the communities that wear the you know
in the populous that are working with
these and I'm I guess I don't know if
they're you know like I say what you
could say about this but you know the
people that are not in that small group
of people that are going to do that
extremely deep work do you have any have
you had any kind of thoughts intuitions
feelings about you know how a lot of
people can approach the work that needs
to be done with the help of psychedelics
hmm well first you're right that I wrote
LSD in the mind of the universe with the
hope that it would be read not only by
other psychedelic voyagers I hope
psychedelic voyages would would read it
and there would be a kind of
conversation that would emerge from
Voyager to Voyager back and forth but I
hope that this book would also be read
by people who are not interested in
taking psychedelics and or who haven't
had the opportunity because what's
important I think in so many ways in the
book is the cosmology that emerges is
the visions of reality that emerged in
the psychedelic state and these can be
very valuable to people whether or not
they ever touch these experiences
themselves just to see what the
understanding of reality that comes
forward and I've had many people write
me since the book has come out and say
I've never taken psychedelics in my life
but I've been a lifelong meditator and I
really relate to what you're saying I've
had many many similar experiences of
collective suffering for example or
different death and rebirth experiences
but I've never used psychedelics and
that's of course what we expect because
psychedelics are simply an amplifier of
consciousness its consciousness that
does the work so if you work with
consciousness in a focused way then
naturally you're going to have similar
experiences in different ways to what
emerges in a psychedelic session
now for people who want to work with
psychedelics several basic rules of
thumb stand out for me one of them is
very very meticulous attention to set in
setting and which of course I think is
widely understood now but I would
emphasize clarity of intention in
creating the conditions of long-term
engagement sometimes our engagement is
short by a few months sometimes our
undertaking is several years of work but
the longer our focused engagement the
more important it is to really set up
the shop carefully to really have your
kiva prepared both inwardly and
outwardly so that your contact what you
want is clean contact and good recall in
clean contact means not obscuring the
field with a lot of other things going
on or tending to a lot of outside things
tripping is fine if people want to trip
and a lot of people have life-changing
experiences tripping no criticism there
but if you want to use this for deep
inner work you have to clarify your
field clear it out and then the second
thing that stands out is the importance
of retention the importance of holding
on to your experiences clarifying
recording them either with works of art
sometimes people do it with music for me
it's always been the written word
methodologically this a lot of the work
which is being done important work being
done with psychedelics is
therapeutically focused aimed at healing
the wounds of the personal psyche and
that's really important work and we're
learning a lot about that particularly
now in this Renaissance of psychedelics
but that which heals at the therapeutic
level at the personal unconscious level
is also that which opens work
experiences deeper into the cosmos
itself it's in renewing our relationship
with the universe that heals so much of
our wounds of incarnation and if you are
called or feel called to push the
boundaries I mean
it really is there are some people who
love to climb mountains and love some
people who love to you know go deep into
the oceans they just have an adventurous
spirit and I think that also is true for
those who want to explore states of
consciousness but it takes a certain
personality type if you will to you have
to a certain rigor a certain capacity to
maintain ambiguity and to deal with
ambiguity a certain kind of mmm
stability of your social circumstance
because it's not just you who go into
these states but into a degree
everyone that you are intimately
associated with is touched by your work
so you have to make sure your life is
grounded and solid that supports the
work and the last thing I would mention
is the deeper you want to go into these
non-ordinary States the more important
it is to have a daily spiritual practice
I just have become so convinced of this
over the time because you need a daily
spiritual practice to ground first just
the energy that's unleashed in these
states and then to ground the
experiences the more you learn about
mysticism and the more you study the
autobiographies of our great saints and
sages the easier it is I think to have
it gives you a touchstone for grounding
your more radical experiences mm-hmm
you know it's funny you mentioned the
great Saints and all that and I don't
think there's an answer to this but it's
just been on my mind a little bit later
lately that you know there are these you
know kind of pinpoint people over the
last couple of thousand years that you
know we hear about I don't remember all
the names but you know st. John of the
Cross st. Francis Meister Eckhart and a
few of these great mystics that we know
but you know of course you know there
are probably many from indigenous
traditions that weren't writing anything
down you know but you know where are
these people now I mean are there just
too many of us for them to stand out on
the planet now like where are the people
like we're on Ramana Maharshi and these
people that seem to have completely
gotten it so
speak yeah I don't know the answer that
question that's kind of a sociological
and historical question I don't really
know the answer I think that we are that
they're more hidden Saints that we might
appreciate but I also think in a
fundamental way I agree with those who
have observed that the age of private
enlightenment is coming to an end
it's already come to an end and it's not
like individual you know enlightenment
work is not important it is important
but we have entered into a time of
history where we need to draw the whole
human species needs to enter into the
enlightened condition the whole human
species needs to really get at the roots
of what's holding us in this tight
configuration of ego because the world
the civilization that we are in now is
the civilization built by the ego and
the ego is ultimately a cut off
psychological entity we we don't
experience our common ground with other
beings and we don't experience our
common ground with the universe itself
it's a fragmented condition and it
builds a fragmented universe and right
now the fragmentation of our universe is
threatening the very vitality of the
lifes of the all life on our planet so I
think we are moving into a time where
the real impetus is collective
transformation and that's a that I think
is kind of taking us in to a different
level of the game and we were in for the
last 2,000 years
yeah well put beautifully but yeah my
old Buddhist teacher that I mentioned
earlier chgyam trungpa I don't you
probably know more about this than I
then I do as a concept but I think there
are different uses of the word term are
hot but we trumpet talked about it was
he he was critical of what he called the
our Han mentality which was the
Enlightenment for self kind of mentality
was the way he designed it yeah so you
know I completely agree with you so
perhaps that leads in for me anyway into
this discussion of the sort of great
death and great awakening that you talk
about in your work and that you explore
it in those journeys and you know the
probably the primary motivation for me
doing this YouTube channel series
altogether is because of the kind of
things you were just talking about that
we've reached a calm a kind of karmic
comeuppance point where the that
fragmented ego mentality has brought
that planet to place where it's not
sustainable to continue in this
direction anymore yeah
so I'm wondering if you could explode me
and talk a little bit about I know one
thing that you've you mentioned in your
talks is that you you you weren't given
a timeline on this there was no 2012
involved but it sounds to me like I
don't know an image I've been using
occasionally is a vote coming down a
river toward a whirlpool or you might
use the term vortex and you know at
first when when when the boat first gets
pulled into the into the orbit is aware
of the of the vortex it's going around
the outer edge kind of slowly but then
it's gradually getting pulled the
strength becomes of the pull becomes
increasingly strong and rapid and it
seems to me we're we're well into that
vortex now I don't know what you can you
comment on yeah well this was a great
surprise for me in my work because when
I began this work I was thinking that
this I was thinking in terms of a model
of individual transformation but it was
doing this work to transform and improve
my my private self in some way and and
that was shattered after two years the
game changed it was it was not about
that and about four years into the work
I began to be given a series of visions
that continue to unfold over over 50
sessions and the the theme of these
visions was always humanity's collective
transformation they were consistent in
in over over time and the message was
humanity was coming to a point
of before-and-after point in history of
a decisive transformation of an
evolutionary jump in the the quality of
consciousness that we would be living
out of and through just just a an
exponential time of great blessing a
time of great grace of great
illumination of great healing and these
visions came for years but I was never
shown in these early years how nature
was gonna pull this off because when I
looked around me it didn't look like
that was what was happening and it
looked like we for every indicator that
we were getting better there were other
indicators that we were getting worse
that more insanity more greed more
corporate control and and then in 1995 I
was given a very very deep session of
series of visions and I was taken into
the future time became very poor able
permeable in my sessions I I entered
into multiple modalities of
trans-temporal experiences and in this I
entered into the deep future and I
experienced what I came to understand
was the death and rebirth of our entire
species and some collective historical
crescendo and I experienced it not as
Chris Bosh individual self looking on
and not even as a spiritual aspect of
Chris bass looking on by this time I had
dissolved so many times and so deeply
into the collective mind that I
experienced this crisis as they asked
the species I experienced it literally
as a rippling of crisis arising within
the collective psyche and I experienced
a time of tremendous suffering a time of
things falling apart of loss of control
of human beings losing more and more of
the constants of their world it the
image that comes to mind is of a
hurricane that's coming over a small
island
which is just threatening all life on
the island and for a time in my
experience I thought we were going to go
extinct I thought we were heading into
an extinction event but then at the peak
time the storm passed and humanity began
to recover to pick themselves up and
when we began to pick ourselves up
something extraordinary happened in the
process of going through this crisis we
were changed I think it's our heart was
broken open in a way there was some kind
of deep transformation when the pain
became so terrible we we began to make
choices that we weren't willing to
consider making at an earlier time of
stability in such extreme instability we
began to make different choices and when
we were past the worst of this crisis
there was a tremendous kind of absurd
new values new insights new ways of
being new ways of organizing if there
were one fundamental theme that emerges
it is the theme of oneness we had an
experience deep in our psyche of oneness
that permeates all existence and that
that's a tremendous spiritual
revitalization and then subsequently in
other sessions I was taken deep into
deep time and given an experience of
what I came to call the future human
that that is this is a change which is
not going to simply precipitate a
political restructuring or an economic
restructuring or a social restructuring
it's a change which is going to reach so
deeply into the collective psyche that
it actually causes an evolutionary flip
of the archetype of the blueprint or the
archetypal blueprint of the human psyche
so that there is literally a an emerge
an emergence of a restructured core
around which our individual lives
crystallize in time I came and just to
touch this future human to go into deep
time and just to touch it was such a
clarifying experience it was so
gratifying because this magnificent a
humanity with its heart healed of all
the pain that we've caused each other
through time and that has been caused in
us by nature a tremendous illumination
of the human mind it was truly an
enlightened species that was emerging
out of this process and this has been
this I think gave the larger context for
my entire life
in my understanding of history that we
are in right now it gave a context which
helped me understand why my individual
enlightenment fell away is insignificant
and my sessions went for years aiming at
collective transformation and trying to
support this collective transformation
wherever possible it did not give me any
timeline as you said it did not give me
any specifics it did not tell me when
where or how but the certainty and the
magnitude of this convulsion seemed to
be driven by some kind of global
ecological crisis that triggered a
global systemic crisis crisis of global
systems which then I began after I began
to have these experiences I began to do
my ecological homework I began to read
more widely and the ecological
literature to pay attention to the
people who have been tracking these
things and I think it's clear you know
and I give the references in the book
that we are coming to a critical time in
human evolution we're on the verge of
losing the planet if we don't change our
ways and we don't seem to be changing
our ways nearly fast enough to avoid a
crisis of unprecedented proportions so I
had these experiences Oh 1985
to 1999 you know 20 years ago and it
seems that these are unfolding now that
we are entering increasingly a time of
ecological plague in a way a time of
great great ecological uncertainty
coming at us devastation coming at us in
global climate change in this context I
I watched Cove in nineteen and I don't
see it as the true crisis of this era it
seems to be too small a crisis but it's
a serious crisis and it's a crisis that
if we respond to it will it could teach
us many things that we will need when
the deeper crises emerge which are
coming in the decades ahead and I think
I think it is teaching us I mean it
there are those who are learning from it
and then those who are just trying to
quickly get back to normal as quickly as
possible but I think I think normal
we're going to find is farther and
farther irretrievable we now have no
choice but to go into a new future and
to find our way into this new future and
I think the divine or whatever you want
to call the intelligence of the universe
the creative capacity of the universe is
pulling us that way it supports us as we
cooperate with this crisis it's taking
us somewhere that it wants us to go
beautiful yeah yeah yeah I've the I've
kind of had the same intuition about the
the kovat situation I it's kind of a
fantasy I suppose you could say in my
mind that that you know the the gods as
it were whatever that is as you say the
divine mmm
there I don't know how this functions of
course and how hands-on they would be
with our journey but it I could almost
imagine that there that the co vid
situation is kind of like letting us
down step by step like here's what can
happen when there's a great disruption
mm-hmm and as you say you know what what
kinds of changes in our individual
mentalities and the way that we do
things collectively might come out of
this and you know of course that remains
to be seen but you know I have a feeling
that at the very least you know the
whole world has been quieter and cleaner
for a while and you know even if people
I mean I could be completely wrong about
this but I wonder if you know that even
if people don't really consciously kind
of pay attention to you know the
implications of that it's it's gotten in
under their skin on some level you know
birds are more audible there may be more
of them around you know the air is
cleaner the pace of life has been slower
I'm seeing so many people riding
bicycles around my neighborhood you know
I'm hoping that more of them will you
know if many of them will continue to
ride those bicycles people are jogging
like nothing like nobody's business
around my neighborhood lately you know
they're gonna come you know when people
get back to their quote-unquote normal
life
III think a lot of people are gonna find
that they've come back
rested healthier they've probably been
eating more at home cooking more at home
yeah it's hard to find yeast in the
stores around him you know but at the
same time you know the way you described
this great death
you know trajectory sounds pretty
frightening in a sense you know and I
guess Tim what comes out to my mind
comes into my mind about that is that
it's increasingly becoming more and more
important for anyone who possibly can to
be a rock as it were for others you know
yeah it is frightening
it really is frightening and I think
it's therefore important to really
understand what's happening I mean there
are a lot of people who will be calling
on the apocalyptic end of days and all
sorts of interpretations there'll be
people the talking about extinction and
so on and so forth but I think what's
really happening is that we are in labor
where this is a birth gestation is a
long process it's a nine-month process
but labor takes place with 24 hours it's
a very short very intense process in
which we give birth to something new
I think Humanity has been just aiding
the future human for thousands and
thousands of years but the process of
giving birth to it is really convulsive
and if you walked into a room when there
was a woman giving labor right in the
middle of it and she's yelling and
screaming and everyone's running around
you would think oh this is terrible
she's gonna die but if you know what's
happening you know that this is labor
this is what labor is like well we are
going into a collective labor I believe
and and therefore it's important for us
to to cultivate an appreciation of what
this actually consists of we are giving
birth to a new form of human being not
simply better in a few little ways
dressing up the edges but a deep
reconstruction of the human psyche and
the way I've come to understand this is
in terms of the concept of the diamond
soul which is a different image but
basically refers to other sessions that
I went through where I experienced what
seemed to be I was given a series of
teachings experiential teachings about
where reincarnation is taking us know it
and it led me to have an understanding
of reincarnation which went considerably
beyond the way it's been talked about in
the traditional Eastern sources because
I think basically the idea in
traditional thinking of reincarnation we
reincarnate we reincarnate we
reincarnate karma follows us we make
improvements we get a little bit better
and better we go from third grade to 4th
grade to fifth grade hopefully more
compassion more intelligent more
resourceful incremental incremental
change but I think what happens
eventually in the reincarnation process
we die and we go into spirit where we
reconnect with soul the consciousness
that holds all of our experience we're
ORN we get small we learned we die we
get large we born we get small and we
keep this up for thousands and thousands
of years only touching our soul our
total consciousness usually in the
afterlife state in the Bardo state but
if this keeps up all of us has been
going through this four thousand
thousands of years sooner or later there
comes a point where I think all what
happened in my sessions all my former
lives started coming in and they hit
critical mass they and when they hit
critical mass there was a massive
explosion of energy and they fused and
when they fuse an extraordinary diamond
light broke out of my chest and it
catapulted me into a state of
consciousness beyond anything I had been
in up to that point and it was a state
of consciousness in which I was an
individual but I was an individual
beyond any frame of reference that I had
known it previously and I think what
that's what's happening with
reincarnation that there comes a time in
history when all of our former lives
become integrated in the early stages
when we integrate our former lives we
often have to deal with leftover pain
and problems that have been that are
still reside in these former lives so
the emphasis is on healing and and
clarifying but eventually when they are
when all of that work is done and they
fuse into a new singularity and that
singularity I think is the birth of the
soul in time so that we permanently
shift our identity from the ego of this
small short-term body which lives maybe
a hundred years to the soul which lives
and thinks and feels on a much much
larger time horizon I think this birth
of soul consciousness inside time is
taking place simultaneously well as the
planet is trying to come to terms with
its divisive history and is trying to
deal with it problems which it cannot
solve at the national level but can only
solve
the global level as we're trying to come
together as one planet internally the
players there are trying to come
together as one soul so that there is a
reciprocity between the the outer
political ecological dynamic in the
inner cycle spiritual dynamic so that I
think the ego is the psychological
structure that built this world and the
ego will never be able to solve the
problems that we have generated it takes
the expansion of the soul to really have
the depth of courage and the depth of
compassion and the depth of insight to
really carry us into the creation of the
next stage of our planetary evolution
yeah beautifully put again yeah yeah my
sense of of this passage I guess you
could say is that it you know it is
scary as we are saying that it looks
like a lot of things that you know
people have been able to you know hold
as as status quo and stability are going
to be ripped away from us and so on and
so on it's going to be a really
challenging time I guess the hopeful or
more optimistic part of my my mind
adheres to this old saying necessity is
the mother of invention and it feels
like as we move out of it's like we've
been you know as you know living in you
know in an illusion in a sense you know
in a kind of a collective and individual
dream that's virtual that's based in our
thoughts and our you know and it's in
our heads and all that and you know as
Kant Tara Terence Mckenna has and others
have put it whistling past the graveyard
you know trying to ignore that you know
the reality of ego death and the spirit
that you know encompasses all but as we
as these conditions destabilize I think
perhaps one of the amazing thing that's
things that's going to come out of this
is you know because there is such a deep
well of creativity and capability in the
human species I think we're going to see
a lot of that coming forth
know that oh that's another one of my
favorite sayings from Victor Hugo
something to the effect of there's
nothing as powerful as an idea whose
time has come right yeah so I think
we're going to see you know as as the
old ways become less viable people can
put less faith in them a greater
openness to new ideas yes I think we're
experiencing this profound polarization
taking place now there will be forces
pulling us very strongly toward the past
towards the divisions of the past
towards the certainties of the past
towards the patterns of the past and
then there will be forces taking us into
of the future taking us into something
less certain more unexplored but but I
think the the jew's is going to be with
the future because with the past if we
if we keep allow ourselves to be pulled
into the past and the patterns of
consumption and corporate control and so
on violence and you know placing one
race over another or one religion over
another one continent over another that
way ends in death it just ends in death
but a different future a collaborative
future working for a world that works
for all working working where a certain
portion of the population has less so
that everybody has more is going to
produce a much much happier better
existence for all of us and in the end
and I think we have the courage to make
it I think you know things like the
coronavirus are basically giving us an
opportunity to flex our courage to flex
our wisdom and to say no when we're
being told lies by people who represent
the past people who represent you know
that the faded wisdom of patriarchy the
faded the you know the unspeakable shame
of ego and we see it dramatized on the
body politic today
you know and and that just leaves a sour
taste in our mouth where when we see
courage when we see compassion when we
see wisdom in sight working for our
collective good that we recognize and
say yes I want to be like that I want to
support those forces mm-hmm
yeah so again hopefully that you know as
Leonard Cohen put it there's a crack and
everything that's how the light gets in
that the light will be coming in and you
know you know I was I read some of the
channeled books that were popular back
in the late 80s and early 90s and one
guy that I didn't liked more than others
was a guy named Ken Carey he had a book
a couple of books called star seed the
new millennium and things like that and
one of the things that assuming this was
actually child that his you know Chan
his source his entity was saying was
these technologies that you have you
know these communication technologies
they're actually pretty interesting
because you know when when the
information gets to the point where you
can you know be sending out that you
know the idea whose time has come we now
have this capability of sharing
information instantly around the planet
pretty much right mm-hmm it's like a we
have these stepping stones in a sense
now right mm-hmm yeah and and I think
what I'm saying and what I'm describing
if if it were just me having these
experiences and then it would be maybe
not that significant but a lot of people
have been having these experiences and
sharing these ideas they've been seeing
the same thing a lot of psychedelic
villagers have been seeing this basic
vision of a time of fundamental
historical crisis and choice indigenous
cultures have been seeing this vision
emerging for decades in their work
mystics like and contemplatives
meditators who had never gone near
psychedelics have been having this
deepening insight that this is a time of
crisis this is a time of where we must
grow
and I think that's one way of looking at
it this is a time of maturation we have
to grow up and to take responsibilities
as adults and there's a certain way in
which we've been living like adolescents
with the qualities of adolescents but
now we need to grow up and I think we
have that capacity and I really think we
will I think we're going to make this
transition even though it's going to get
difficult I just have confidence in I
think when I'm really feeling deeply
uncertain and fearful I remind myself
that the universe has brought us this
far and I know that there are n rows
there are extinction events that are
taking place all around us but I trust
that if if we are entering into a time
of such momentous choice and
consequences that we the universe must
think that we're ready and I think I
well it's why I placed my trust in the
universe's wisdom and at least in my
sessions the universe seems to clearly
think that we're ready in that it knows
what it's doing and we will be able to
participate in that knowing well this is
the reason why I'm so happy that you are
my initial or inaugurate of guests on
this hopefully developing series because
that you know this one it's it's it's
central to to why I have such respect
for you and your work chris is that that
it's hopeful it points out that there
you know who we possibly can be and that
there was there is a way to get there
right you know there is a little bit
like the Four Noble Truths you know that
that there is a way to get there you
know there are pathways and and you know
and as we've been talking about here you
know people need that kind of you know
encouragement that kind of you know
vision to be shared you know as things
get you know less stable for people that
they have less to less ground to hang on
to so I think this is probably a good
time to bring it to a close we've been
talking for close to an hour
and I'm it's clear that you could have a
lot more to say on these topics so we
might have to do it again actually it
just occurred to me at this very moment
because your your I'll have to say
you're an easy interview Chris because I
just need to ask one question and
articulate it so so clearly and so
beautifully I really appreciate that I'm
really moved in my heart to you know to
hear these kinds of things that you have
experienced and that you're sharing with
people so this being my very first one I
don't haven't figured out how to end
these yet I know sometimes people would
you know say goodbye to the guest and
then talk to the talk to the the viewers
a little bit but I think I'll just do
that while you're still here if you
don't mind
so also before you do that and that's
fine to do but first I want to thank you
for your initiative because because
you've been drawing people together in
the conference's that you've been
organizing for years now and your
commitment to our collective
transformation has been profound and
this continues in this series your your
your vision is for collective awakening
and I just honor that and just want to
thank you for it well thanks so much for
saying that and yeah that is the reason
you know I just feel really connected to
that vision and you know I another one
of my favorite sayings is from Bishop
Desmond Tutu the legendary South African
Bishop and I don't don't remember the
full sentence but it was something to
the effect that a lot of people don't
believe in the possibility of
possibility and that that's what we need
is you have to believe in the
possibility of possibility and then to
my mind
you know the the ego and whatever it is
can cook up all kinds of stories about
what's going on but there's only one
attitude that's functional and that is
to believe in the possibility of
possibility and do what you need to do
your own healing work and participating
whatever you can do yeah yeah yeah I
think so
you know so it's a wonderful vision it's
a wonderful prayer and excuse me do you
want to say anything is there can people
contact you or is there anything to say
about that well actually I I'm
embarrassed that I haven't gotten my
website finished yet I hopefully it will
be up in a month or so it will be crisp
acecomm will be where people will be
able to find me online right now they
can find me if they go to my articles
and publications if they go to
academia.edu and sign in there they'll
be able to find me under Chris M beige
and everything that I've written and
many of the podcasts are there but Chris
Bosh calm soon will be where people can
reach me and they can also reach me at
my university webs my address cm beige @
y su dot edu I should be able to put
little tabs up on the screen at some
point yeah show those four people and in
the meantime just so they know well I
think maybe it's showing on the screen
it does on mine when I'm speaking and
when you're speaking but it's pretty or
me spelled ba CH e yes it's not
necessarily an intuitive spelling and
pronunciation man yeah yeah so again the
book that we're talking about more than
any you know he's got other works as I
mentioned at the beginning is this one
it's it's incredible it's really
remarkable and there's so much more in
this book that we didn't cover today so
I hope people will go and find this book
it's going to be it already is and will
continue to be part of this kind of
transformation that we're talking about
so yeah I guess Thank You Steven thank
you for the conversation thank you for
the opportunity to bring these ideas
forward to your listeners
you do it so well Chris really you know
I I know you're humble about it but you
know I could listen to you all day you
really have them you know you're in
you're doing the right job you know if
you found your job I think because you
explained it so so clearly so again
thank you very much and I'll just say
well you're still here because I haven't
like I say I haven't figured it out
quite you know how I want to end these
things I'll just say that I'm hoping to
be able to put a little subscribe button
up on here and I hope people will
subscribe to this YouTube channel and
share it and so on and it'll also be on
anchor which is an audio podcast I hope
well once I figure it I will strip the
audio off off the video and put it on
anchor as well so again much much thanks
from the heart Chris night care bye bye
my friend
you